We'll continue exploring
terminal operations in the Java
Streams framework by focusing
now on the forEach terminal
operation.
This operation
will once again be
showcased in the context
of our Hamlet program.
ForEach is an example
of a terminal operation
that returns no value.
You'll see that if you take
a look at the ex12 folder
in my GitHub account, there's
several variants of forEach
that are showcased
in this example.
And this is the
runForEach method
that illustrates how the
forEach method works.
As you can see here,
we create and process
the stream that contains
the characters from the play
Hamlet.
And then we perform
the designated action
on each element of the
stream using forEach.
Now, what I've shown here
is using forEach along
with the println
method reference,
but you can also use forEach
for other operations as well.
For example, here we can
create ourselves a new list
variable called results.
And we can actually pass results
colon colon add as a method
reference to the forEach method.
And that will have
the side effect
of adding each of the elements
into the results list.
You have to be careful
how you use this however.
In particular, you
have to make sure
that you remember to
initialize the results object.
If you forget to do this, then
of course, chaos and insanity
will ensue because the
forEach method will
try to add something
to a null pointer
or an uninitialized
pointer, which
will cause uninitialized
reference, which will cause
all kinds of problems.
Likewise, using forEach
with side effects
in a parallel stream will also
incur all kinds of problems.
In particular, if you were to
try to write this program here
where we're going to call the
results colon colon add method
in the forEach terminal
operation in a parallel stream,
we'll end up with some
nasty race conditions
because different threads
in the ForkJoinPool
will be calling the
add method on results,
which is not intended to be
used in a thread-safe way.
It's not synchronized in
any way, shape, or form.
Of course, you could
work around this
by creating a results object
that was synchronized.
For example, you could
create the results
to be a concurrent linked queue
whose add method is properly
synchronized.
But this approach
is very error-prone.
And it's inefficient.
And it's confusing.
It's using side effects where
there are quite frankly much
better terminal operations.
In particular, using terminal
operations like collect
is a much better way to go here.
There is an alternative
way of doing forEach,
which is called forEachOrdered.
And forEachOrdered
is useful if it's
important to present the results
in so-called encounter order.
That's the order that
they were encountered
in the original input.
And sometimes this matters.
Sometimes it doesn't.
But the key thing to note is
that with forEach, there's
no attempt to try to
preserve the encounter order.
Whereas with
forEachOrdered, there
is going to be a
preservation of the encounter
order in the output.
Now, not surprisingly,
that's going
to take more overhead in order
to order things in that way.
But it's possible to do so.
It's only really relevant
to discuss the difference
in semantics between
forEach and forEachOrdered
in the context of
parallel streams.
If it's a sequential stream,
there's only one thread.
And so ordering is going
to be a moot point.
But for parallel streams,
it does actually matter.